For more information on using the H5Part API, see the H5Part website:

        http://www-vis.lbl.gov/Research/AcceleratorSAPP/


Motivation
----------

Particle based simulations of accelerator beam-lines, especially in six
dimensional phase space, generate vast amounts of data. Even though a subset
of statistical information regarding phase space or analysis needs to be
preserved, reading and writing such enormous restart files on massively
parallel supercomputing systems remains challenging.

H5Part is a very simple data storage schema and provides an API that
simplifies the reading/writing of the data to the HDF5 file format. An
important foundation for a stable visualization and data analysis environment
is a stable and portable file storage format and its associated APIs. The
presence of a "common file storage format," including associated APIs, will
help foster a fundamental level of interoperability across the project's
software infrastructure. It will also help ensure that key data analysis
capabilities are present during the earliest phases of the software development
effort.

H5Part is built on top of the HDF5 (Hierarchical Data Format) library. HDF5
offers a self-describing machine-independent binary file format that supports
scalable parallel I/O performance for MPI codes on a variety of supercomputing
systems, and works equally well on laptop computers. The API is available for
C, C++, and Fortran codes. The H5Part file format and APIs enable disparate
research groups with different simulation implementations to transparently
share datasets and data analysis tools. For instance, the common file format
will enable groups that depend on completely different simulation
implementations to share data analysis tools.


File Organization and API
-------------------------

The proposed file storage format uses HDF5 for the lowlevel file storage and a
simple API to provide a high-level interface to that file format. A programmer
can either use the H5Part API to access the data files or write directly to the
file format using some simple conventions for organizing and naming the objects
stored in the file.

In order to store Particle Data in the HDF5 file format, we have formalized the
hierarchical arrangement of the datasets and naming conventions for the groups
and associated datasets. The sample H5Part API formally encodes these
conventions in order to provide a simple and uniform way to access these files
from C, C++, and Fortran codes. The API makes it easier to write very portable
data adaptors for visualization tools in order to expand the number of tools
available to access the data. Even so, anyone can use the HDF5 h5ls utility to
examine the organization of the H5Part files and even write their own
HDF5-based interface for reading and writing the file format. The standards
offered by the sample API are completely independent of the standard for
organizing data within the file.The file format supports the storage of
multiple timesteps of datasets that contain multiple fields. 

